Phantom 3: Negative control. Phantom 3 was designed as a negative control to test 
whether a static, large mass (i.e., no active expansion during imaging) fails to produce 
the circumferential stiffening ring observed during active inflation in Phantoms 1 and 2. 
This design also controls for potential geometric/processing effects associated with a larger 
balloon boundary during directional filtering. For this purpose, an additional 200 mL of 
water was injected into the baseline-sized balloon (50 mL) prior to embedding in the 8% 
gelatin and 7% cellulose mixture. During the scan, no further inflation was performed for 
Phantom 3. All gels were allowed to solidify at room temperature for 5 days to ensure 
complete solidification.
MRE Setup and Phantom Scanning
Mechanical vibrations at 80 Hz were introduced into the phantoms using a commercially 
available pneumatic active driver (Resoundant Inc., Minnesota, USA) connected to a 
custom-designed MRE passive driver. Each phantom was placed on top of the passive 
driver, which was designed to induce uniform axial motion of the entire phantom within 
the container, resulting in the side walls of the container serving as sources of shear wave 
generation (25). All MR experiments were performed on a 3.0T scanner (SIGNA Premier, 
GE HealthCare, Wisconsin, USA) using a 20-channel body coil (AIR™, GE HealthCare, 
Wisconsin, USA). The imaging was conducted in the coronal plane relative to the scanner 
bore and produced axial cross-sections of the phantom. A dual-motion encoding, spin-echo 
echo planar imaging (SE-EPI) MRE sequence (26) was used with the following imaging 
parameters: repetition time (TR) = 4000 ms, echo time (TE) = 72 ms, field of view (FOV) 
= 24 cm, acquisition matrix: 80×80, 80 contiguous coronal slices (3-mm thickness). The 
motion encoding gradients were applied in the positive and negative x-, y-, and z-axis 
directions with 4 equally spaced phase offsets sampled over one period of the 80-Hz motion.
As shown in Figure 3, during each MRE acquisition for Phantom 1 and Phantom 2, the 
balloon was inflated in 50 mL increments using a lockable syringe and then deflated 
stepwise by extracting 100 mL of water. This process resulted in seven measurement states: 
baseline (50 mL), 100 mL, 150 mL, 200 mL, 250 mL, 150 mL, and 50 mL (returning to 
the baseline size). Each state was maintained for ~10 min (including the inflation/deflation 
processes, stabilization of the setup, and MRE acquisition) before proceeding to the next 
state. To estimate the balloon size and position, high-resolution (0.9 mm in-plane resolution) 
coronal T2-weighted (T2W) images were collected at each state.
Data Processing for Phantom Study
The MRE phase was unwrapped using the dual-motion encoding approach (26). The 
first temporal harmonic of the curl of the displacement fields was calculated to remove 
contributions from the longitudinal wave.
TSM workflow. TSM consists of directional decomposition of the MRE wave field 
followed by direction-specific inversion and a max-type directional combination designed 
to preserve localized directional stiffening. A schematic of the inversion pipeline is shown 
in Figure 4. More specifically, after phase unwrapping and curl processing, the curl wave 
field was separated into N directionally filtered components (here N = 20, dodecahedral 
Yin et al.
Page 5
Magn Reson Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 March 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
