The potential applications of TSM are broad, as it enables the detection of actively 
expanding masses of any kind. Particularly in tumor assessment and treatment, TSM offers 
a noninvasive mechanical contrast that may help identify lesions associated with pronounced 
mass effect and strain-related perilesional stiffening. With longitudinal validation and 
clinical correlation, future studies can evaluate whether TSM-derived signatures relate to 
lesion growth behavior (e.g., rapid versus slow mass-forming expansion) and whether they 
add value for risk stratification and treatment monitoring. This capability could provide 
clinicians with a deeper understanding of tumor pathophysiology, aid in predicting treatment 
outcomes, and identify therapeutic targets. For instance, this could be particularly valuable 
in managing HCCs, where radiologists often encounter lesions with indeterminate features 
based on size or imaging characteristics on conventional imaging. The ability of TSM 
to provide additional mechanical information can assist radiologists in assessing the level 
of concern for these lesions, guiding appropriate follow-up intervals, and aiding in the 
management of patients, particularly those who may be candidates for transplantation. Such 
information is crucial for transplant surgeons in determining the appropriate course of action 
and timing for monitoring these lesions.
Conclusion
This proof-of-concept study introduces MRE-based tissue strain mapping (TSM) as an 
innovative approach for noninvasively assessing strain-induced changes in perilesional 
stiffness associated with expanding lesions. The results support the feasibility of TSM and 
motivate future studies to determine whether TSM provides clinically useful information 
about expansile mass effect beyond conventional MRE, thus enhancing the capabilities 
of diagnosis, treatment planning, and monitoring. Further research is warranted to refine 
the TSM methodology, validate its performance in larger patient cohorts with longitudinal 
follow-up, and explore its potential applications in various clinical settings.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by grants from the National Institute Health (R37 EB001981, R61/R33 AT012185, 
and R01 NS113760).
References
1. Nathani P, Gopal P, Rich N, Yopp A, Yokoo T, John B, Marrero J, Parikh N, Singal AG. 
Hepatocellular carcinoma tumour volume doubling time: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Gut 2021;70(2):401–407. [PubMed: 32398224] 
2. Feucht D, Haas P, Skardelly M, Behling F, Rieger D, Bombach P, Paulsen F, Hoffmann E, 
Hauser TK, Bender B, Renovanz M, Niyazi M, Tabatabai G, Tatagiba M, Roder C. Preoperative 
growth dynamics of untreated glioblastoma: Description of an exponential growth type, correlating 
factors, and association with postoperative survival. Neurooncol Adv 2024;6(1):vdae053. [PubMed: 
38680987] 
Yin et al.
Page 14
Magn Reson Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 March 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
