Tissue Strain Mapping Via Magnetic Resonance Elastography 
Can be Used to Detect Active Lesion Expansion
Ziying Yin, Ph.D.1, David S. Lake, M.S.1, Armando Manduca, Ph.D.2, John Huston III, M.D.1, 
Richard L. Ehman, M.D.1
1Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN
2Physiology and Biomedical Engineering, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN
Abstract
Purpose: Active lesion expansion is clinically important because it can indicate disease 
progression and influence management and treatment planning. However, sequential imaging 
is often unavailable, and rapid growth can only be inferred from indirect findings such as 
active perilesional tissue injury. This study aimed to implement and test the feasibility of an 
MR elastography (MRE)-based technique for assessing the expansile nature of mass lesions by 
detecting stiffness changes caused by mechanical strain manifestations in adjacent tissues.
Methods: A tissue strain mapping (TSM) algorithm was developed using spatial-temporal 
directional filtering to reveal the presence of perilesional latent strain that is not apparent in 
conventional MRE inversions. The technical feasibility was tested in tissue-simulating phantoms 
containing a mass that was progressively expanded. Preliminary feasibility for clinical application 
was also demonstrated in representative in vivo examples. Resulting TSM maps were compared 
with conventional MRE stiffness maps.
Results: In the phantom experiments, TSM revealed the presence of local strain at the periphery 
of the expanding mass, with the effect increasing proportionally to the degree of expansion. 
Conventional MRE did not demonstrate comparable localized stiffening patterns. In vivo examples 
showed similar perilesional strain features that were not apparent on conventional MRE maps.
Conclusion: The feasibility of the proposed MRE-based tissue strain mapping technique was 
demonstrated in phantom and preliminary in vivo studies. These findings suggest that the 
technique is a promising tool for assessing the expansile nature of mass lesions and motivate 
further development of the TSM processing and exploration of potential clinical applications.
Keywords
Magnetic resonance elastography (MRE); Tissue strain mapping; Expanding lesions; Perilesional 
stiffness; Tumor biomechanical imaging
Corresponding Author: Ziying Yin, PhD, yin.ziying@mayo.edu, 200 1st St SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. 
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Magn Reson Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 March 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
