it quantifies tissue mechanical properties, such as shear stiffness, a parameter sensitive 
to changes in tissue tension and structure (13,14). Localized stiffening adjacent to an 
expanding mass may therefore serve as a measurable manifestation of the underlying strain 
field. Indeed, previous studies have revealed that when isotropic tissue is compressed, its 
mechanical properties change to become anisotropic, with increased shear stiffness in the 
direction perpendicular to the compression and little change or slightly decreased stiffness 
along the compression axis (15–18).
These principles have been applied in attempts to estimate internal tumor pressure. It has 
been proposed that a nearly spherical, well-separated tumor under high pressure compresses 
adjacent tissue radially while stretching it circumferentially. Due to mechanical nonlinearity, 
this results in increased peri-tumoral shear stiffness circumferentially and decreased stiffness 
radially. Consistent with this theory, several MRE studies have sought to characterize tumor 
pressure by identifying this specific pattern of heterogeneous shear modulus distribution 
around tumors (19,20). These studies often use an idealized model that assumes a single 
dominant wave propagation direction. Results from simulations and phantom experiments 
show how shear waves used in MRE detect apparent changes in shear modulus along their 
propagation direction when deformed, suggesting the method’s potential to estimate total 
tumor pressure. Furthermore, another line of research integrates MRE data with in silico 
modeling to estimate both displacement and pressure fields in poroelastic biological tissues 
(21). However, in most practical applications of MRE, the presence of multiple interfaces 
causes diffraction, reflection, and mode conversion, leading to complex wavefields that 
do not have a single prominent direction of wave propagation. This complexity presents 
challenges in applying these techniques in vivo using existing models.
The goal of this study was to develop, validate through phantom testing, and demonstrate 
preliminary in vivo feasibility of an MRE-based method for identifying abnormal local 
tissue strain that is suitable for use with complex, multidirectional shear wave fields. 
We hypothesized that the proposed MRE-based tissue strain mapping (TSM) technique 
could depict strain-induced perilesional stiffness changes in expanding lesions that may be 
undetectable using conventional MRE inversion methods. The methodology applies spatial-
temporal directional filters (DFs) to decompose MRE displacement data, separating complex 
wave fields into components propagating in multiple directions in three-dimensional space. 
Inversion processing of wave fields propagating parallel to the lesion-host interface is 
expected to demonstrate locally elevated stiffness in host tissue if the tissue is actively being 
stretched by an expanding mass lesion, whereas inversions of wave fields in other directions 
would not depict this anisotropic effect. The multiple inversion results are then combined in 
a way that preserves local strain-related effects.
The TSM technique was tested in a series of phantom experiments using both linear and 
nonlinear tissue-simulating materials containing an embedded expandable mass. Preliminary 
in vivo feasibility was demonstrated in a small number of patient studies, including a case of 
acute intracranial hemorrhage and two cases of hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC).
Yin et al.
Page 3
Magn Reson Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 March 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
