10 
J.M. Scott, A. Arani and A. Manduca et al. / Medical Image Analysis 63 (2020) 101710 
Fig. 9. ILI provides sharper transitions at boundaries of stiff tumors in vivo . Nega- 
tive values on the x -axis represent distance from the boundary into normal brain 
while positive values show distance into the tumor. The zero position is the ﬁrst 
voxel labeled as tumor. Dashed lines connect median values at each position while 
solid lines show the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles for each inversion. 
ing of the displacement data that negatively impacts spatial res- 
olution. One recent approach has removed the local homogeneity 
assumption, but at the cost of requiring MRE data at multiple fre- 
quencies, which would increase scan time ( Barnhill et al., 2018 ). 
Another approach uses a ﬁnite element based inversion technique 
that does not assume homogeneity but needs further evaluation 
in vivo ( Honarvar et al., 2013 ). Nonlinear inversion is an iterative 
technique that uses ﬁnite element models to jointly estimate dis- 
placements and tissue mechanical parameters within subzones of 
the displacement image ( McGarry et al., 2012 ; Van Houten et al., 
2001 ). It does not assume local homogeneity. An adaptation to 
NLI adds soft prior regularization, which incorporates spatial in- 
formation into the inversion by penalizing heterogeneity within 
speciﬁed subregions ( McGarry et al., 2013 ). The spatial information 
comes from a segmentation that is provided to the algorithm. This 
method can produce sharp stiffness gradients at boundaries and 
decrease measurement uncertainty in small ROIs ( Johnson et al., 
2016 ; McGarry et al., 2013 ), but is sensitive to the underlying seg- 
mentation and favors homogeneity within some region of interest. 
Due to its iterative approach that requires solving many small ﬁ- 
nite element simulations, NLI reconstruction time is on the order 
of hours. The ILI network presented in this study took approxi- 
mately 3 days to train (1 day to generate training data, and two 
days to train the ANN), but could reconstruct the included phan- 
tom and brain MRE studies in under 10 minutes. GPU acceleration 
would markedly reduce the time to invert images, and may accel- 
erate generation of training data. 
Neural network inversions (NNIs, including both HLI and ILI) 
could easily be implemented into a clinical workﬂow. Each NNI is 
limited to processing data at the resolution, frequency, and stiff- 
ness range at which it was trained. While it takes days to generate 
an NNI, it can then be used to invert any MRE data at its trained 
resolution and frequency when its stiffness range is appropriate. 
Training an NNI for a particular resolution, frequency, and stiffness 
range is simply accomplished by adapting the parameters in the 
CHO simulations used to generate training data. Further, as was 
done in this study for the in vivo data, MRE data acquired at a dif- 
ferent resolution could be resampled to the resolution of the NNI 
before inversion. In practice, acquisition parameters of MRE proto- 
cols for speciﬁc applications remain mostly constant over time, and 
after an initial set of NNIs has been trained for regularly acquired 
frequencies and resolutions, the need to train new NNIs should be 
infrequent. 
The primary limitation of this study is in the CHO simulation 
used to generate training data. The CHO simulation has important 
limitations, and it is possible that training an ANN on simulated 
wave data from a model obeying the full Navier equations of mo- 
tion in linear elastic materials would offer improved results. Partic- 
ularly pertinent to this study, the CHO simulation does not contain 
longitudinal waves, and as such cannot accurately simulate mode 
conversion at interfaces. We selected the CHO model because it 
can be solved more rapidly, providing a suﬃciently sized train- 
ing set in a reasonable period of time. Despite its simplicity, our 
results indicate that the CHO model is accurate enough to offer 
an improvement over existing inversion algorithms, and the incor- 
poration of a model obeying the Navier equations for linear elas- 
tic materials that provides the full vector displacement ﬁeld is a 
planned future direction. 
We also note that ANNs are inherently good at interpolation 
and bad at extrapolation. This is potentially beneﬁcial in MRE, as 
it produces a stable inversion, but it does limit accurate param- 
eter estimation to the range used to train the ANN. This makes 
NNI-based stiffness estimates sensitive to parameter selection. The 
distribution of parameters in the training set must be suﬃciently 
wide to capture the clinical information of interest, though a pa- 
rameter range that is too wide will sacriﬁce accuracy within the 
range of interest. In this study, we chose to have a maximum stiff- 
ness cutoff of 15 kPa, as the clinical utility of an estimate higher 
than 15 kPa is unclear in the applications presented here. 
In conclusion, the results of this study conﬁrm that neural 
network-based inversion algorithms for MRE can improve stiffness 
estimates in materials with spatially varying stiffness. These results 
provide motivation for further development of neural network- 
based inversion algorithms. 
Declaration of Competing Interest 
The authors declare the following ﬁnancial interests/personal 
relationships which may be considered as potential competing in- 
terests. A.M., K.P.M., J.D.T., J.H., R.L.E., M.C.M. and Mayo Clinic have 
a ﬁnancial conﬂict of interest related to this research. This research 
has been reviewed by the Mayo Clinic Conﬂict of Interest Review 
Board and is being conducted in compliance with Mayo Clinic Con- 
ﬂict of Interest policies. 
CRediT authorship contribution statement 
Jonathan M. Scott: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, 
Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing - original draft. Arvin Arani: 
Methodology, Software, Writing - review & editing. Armando Man- 
duca: Methodology, Writing - review & editing. Kiaran P. McGee: 
Resources, Writing - review & editing. Joshua D. Trzasko: Method- 
ology, Writing - review & editing. John Huston III: Resources, 
Project administration, Writing - review & editing. Richard L. 
Ehman: Conceptualization, Writing - review & editing, Supervision, 
Project administration, Funding acquisition. Matthew C. Murphy: 
Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Formal analysis, Writing 
- review & editing, Supervision, Project administration, Funding ac- 
quisition. 
Acknowledgments 
Research reported in this publication was supported by the 
N ational Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering of 
the National Institutes of Health under award numbers EB001981 , 
EB024450 , EB027064 . 
