2 
J.M. Scott, A. Arani and A. Manduca et al. / Medical Image Analysis 63 (2020) 101710 
placement data. There are many strategies for performing this cal- 
culation, including but not limited to local frequency estimation 
(LFE) ( Braun et al., 2001 ; Manduca et al., 2001 ), nonlinear inver- 
sion (NLI) ( McGarry et al., 2012 ; Van Houten et al., 2001 ), and di- 
rect inversion (DI) ( Oliphant et al., 2001 ; Papazoglou et al., 2008 ; 
Romano et al., 20 0 0 , 1998 ). Each of these approaches has their ad- 
vantages and limitations. DI and LFE techniques assume local ho- 
mogeneity, which results in blurring of large stiffness gradients. 
NLI does not assume local homogeneity, but its iterative approach 
relying on ﬁnite element simulations results in long reconstruction 
times and total variation regularization encourages piecewise con- 
stant mechanical property estimates ( Van Houten et al., 2001 ). Re- 
cently, an adaptation of DI that does not assume local homogene- 
ity has been developed ( Barnhill et al., 2018 ; Sánchez et al., 2010 ), 
but this method relies on data at multiple frequencies to stabilize 
the result, resulting in longer scan times, and needs further eval- 
uation in vivo . Murphy et al. recently reported a machine learn- 
ing framework for MRE inversion using artiﬁcial neural networks 
(ANNs) trained on simulated wave data ( Murphy et al., 2018 ). The 
neural network inversion (NNI) produced stable stiffness estimates 
using a small spatial footprint even in the presence of noise, but 
was trained on simulated wave data that assumed homogeneous 
materials and as such does not account for local gradients in me- 
chanical properties during parameter estimation. 
There is still a need for an inversion algorithm that can provide 
stable stiffness estimates in the presence of noise, does not assume 
local homogeneity, is computationally eﬃcient, and can invert MRE 
images acquired at a single frequency. This work uses the same 
framework as Murphy et al., but accounts for local inhomogeneity 
by training ANNs on wave data generated by a coupled harmonic 
oscillator simulation of shear wave propagation in a medium with 
inhomogeneous stiffness. Here we present initial results for using 
this framework to estimate stiffness of inclusions in simulation and 
phantom experiments, and demonstrate in vivo feasibility in brain 
lesions. 
2. Methods 
Simulations and analyses were performed in MATLAB R2017b 
(The MathWorks, Inc., Natick, MA, USA). The ANNs were built and 
trained using Keras ( Chollet, Francois, 2015 ) with a TensorFlow 
backend ( Abadi et al., 2015 ). 
2.1. Simulated training data 
A coupled harmonic oscillators (CHO) simulation adapted from 
( Sack et al., 2002 ) was used to generate 3-dimensional displace- 
ment data sets. The CHO simulation models discretely sampled 
harmonic displacements in a medium with assigned spatially- 
varying material properties. The detailed derivation for the 2D case 
can be found in ( Braun et al., 2001 ) and the extension to 3D in 
( Sack et al., 2002 ). This simulation does not model the full Navier 
equations of motion, speciﬁcally neglecting longitudinal waves and 
mode conversion at interfaces. However, it can be solved quickly, 
allowing generation of the large numbers of training examples re- 
quired to train and test an artiﬁcial neural network in a short time 
frame. Furthermore, it is common practice in the MRE ﬁeld to ap- 
ply a curl operator to the displacement ﬁeld to remove longitudi- 
nal waves from the displacement ﬁelds prior to inversion. We have 
used the curl of the wave ﬁeld as the input to the NNI algorithm 
for all experimental data sets. It is important to note that while 
this step will reduce the impact of longitudinal waves, shear waves 
generated at interfaces due to mode conversion will still be absent 
in the simulated data. 
Each simulated data set was a 16 × 16 × 16 patch of 2 mm 
isotropic voxels ( Fig. 1 ). Piecewise smooth input stiffness maps 
were generated by smoothing 3D Gaussian noise ﬁelds with ran- 
domly rotated 3D Gaussian kernels of randomly chosen dimensions 
( σ in range 1–4 voxels selected independently for each dimen- 
sion). The range of stiffness values in each simulated patch was 
selected from a uniform distribution of 0–14.5 kPa and the smooth 
map is scaled accordingly. The absolute minimum and maximum 
stiffness values allowed in any stiffness map were 0.5 and 15 kPa 
respectively. An ellipsoid inclusion taken from an independently 
generated smoothly varying random ﬁeld was inserted into half 
of the simulations to provide training examples with sharp tran- 
sitions in stiffness and create piecewise smooth stiffness maps. 
A randomly selected number of harmonic force generators (1–
10) with an oscillation frequency of 60 Hz were placed at the 
boundary of the simulation. The damping ratio for each simula- 
tion was randomly selected from a uniform distribution from 0 to 
0.7, which covers the range of physiologic values reported in the 
brain ( Johnson et al., 2013 ). The steady state solution at 4 phase 
offsets equally distributed across one period of motion was used 
to generate 4 displacement images for each dataset. 
After each dataset had been generated, a cubic patch was se- 
lected from the center of the simulation. For data sets with inclu- 
sions, the sharp transition was included in the patch. Zero-mean 
Gaussian noise was added to each patch of training data with a 
standard deviation scaled to assign the patch a median signal to 
noise ratio in the range 1–20 (uniform distribution). The input fea- 
tures to the artiﬁcial neural network were the real and imaginary 
components of the temporal ﬁrst harmonic of the voxels in each 
patch. The real and imaginary components receive the same scal- 
ing, such that no value in either the real or imaginary component 
had an absolute value greater than 1. 
2.2. Inhomogeneous Learned Inversion (ILI) 
The 3D convolutional neural network architecture used includes 
inception blocks and residual connections and has been described 
previously ( Murphy et al., 2020 ). The network was ﬁt using the 
Adam optimizer ( Kingma and Ba, 2017 ) with a mean squared er- 
ror (MSE) loss function. Weights were updated after processing 
batches of 10 0 0 training examples. Three decreasing learning rates 
were used, and training at each learning rate was stopped after 
three consecutive iterations where the MSE did not improve in the 
validation set. The output of the network was a single stiffness es- 
timate, with stiffness deﬁned as the product of density and the 
square of the wave speed, assigned to the voxel at the center of 
the patch. 
2.3. Footprint selection 
In MRE inversion with homogenous algorithms, smaller patches 
are desirable (for higher resolution), but larger patches may be re- 
quired to suﬃciently reduce noise. In the proposed framework, we 
expect patch size to have little effect on resolution and for large 
patches to offer im proved performance in noisy data. However, 
large patches will increase the likelihood of edge artifacts when 
the processing footprint overlaps with voxels outside the tissue of 
interest (such as cerebrospinal ﬂuid and skull in brain MRE). For 
this reason, as well as the computational cost associated with in- 
creasing patch size, we limited our maximum side length to 9 vox- 
els. To ensure we chose the optimal footprint within that limita- 
tion, 5 million 3-dimensional simulated datasets were generated, 
and separate ANNs were trained as described above using cubic 
training patches with side lengths of 5, 7, and 9 voxels. An addi- 
tional 250,0 0 0 simulated datasets were generated to serve as the 
validation set, and 30,0 0 0 simulated datasets were generated for 
the test set. Each network was evaluated on its test set by deter- 
mining the correlation coeﬃcient between the inversion estimate 
