8 
J.M. Scott, A. Arani and A. Manduca et al. / Medical Image Analysis 63 (2020) 101710 
Fig. 4. ILI more clearly depicts stiff inclusions in a brain-simulating phantom. Top left: Photograph of the PVC phantom. Inclusion diameters, proceeding counter clock- 
wise from the inclusion labeled with the asterisk, are 1.75, 2, 2.25, 2.5, 2.75, and 3 cm. Top Middle: MRE magnitude image. Bottom left: Direct inversion after 3 × 3 × 3 
median ﬁltering. Bottom middle: HLI. Bottom right: ILI. The measured stiffness of the background and inclusions was 3.42 and 7.09 kPa, respectively. 
Fig. 5. ILI provides higher contrast to noise ratio (CNR) in the phantom. Calcu- 
lated CNRs for the inversions shown in Fig. 4 . The size of the circles represents the 
driver power (3, 5 or 7 percent). 
inclusions of 1.75 to 3 cm in diameter ( Fig. 5 and Supplemental Fig. 
1). Further, ILI provided sharper boundaries at the edges of inclu- 
sions ( Fig. 6 and Supplemental Fig. 3). As would be expected due 
to the assumption of local homogeneity, DI and HLI blur inclusion 
boundaries more with larger spatial footprints ( Fig. 5 versus Sup- 
plemental Fig. 1). 
In the meningioma cases shown ( Fig. 7 ), ILI more sharply de- 
marcated tumor boundaries. ILI also shows focal areas of increased 
stiffness in presumably normal brain when compared to the HLI 
and DI stiffness maps. While this study is not designed to assess 
the accuracy of these regions, we note that the general areas where 
ILI shows a stiffness increase also show stiffness increases with 
the other two inversions, just less clearly deﬁned and with lower 
stiffness estimates. Further studies are needed to assess the per- 
formance of ILI in normal brain. The large stiffness training range 
used in this study was chosen expressly for analysis of focal in- 
clusions and tumors, and more accurate estimates in normal brain 
would likely be achieved using a smaller training range. 
In the cross-subject in vivo experiment, ILI produced a higher 
Dice coeﬃcient, labeling more of each tumor as stiff, than DI, but 
not HLI ( Fig. 8 ). This equivalency of HLI and DI may be due to the 
methodology used to set a threshold for what qualiﬁes as stiffer 
than normal brain. We chose to use the 95 th percentile of nor- 
mal brain values, and as can be seen in Fig. 7 , HLI produces softer 
and more homogeneous estimates in normal brain than DI and ILI. 
As such the threshold was lower for HLI than the other two algo- 
rithms. Additionally, to perform these analyses we assume that the 
tumor is homogeneously stiffer than normal brain. While this may 
have been the surgeon’s qualitative impression at resection, it is 
likely that there is some heterogeneity in stiffness within the tu- 
