4 
J.M. Scott, A. Arani and A. Manduca et al. / Medical Image Analysis 63 (2020) 101710 
2.6. Phantom experiment 
To assess the performance of ILI on real data, MRE was per- 
formed on a polyvinyl chloride (PVC) brain phantom contain- 
ing six spherical inclusions with diameters of 1.75 cm, 2 cm, 
2.25 cm, 2.5 cm, 2.75 cm, and 3 cm. The 50% PVC/50% soft- 
ener background has a stiffness of 3.42 kPa (at 60 Hz) and 
the 65% PVC/35% softener inclusions have a stiffness of 7.09 kPa 
as measured on a RheoSpectris C500 + (Rheolution, Inc., Mon- 
treal, QC, Canada) on samples poured from the same batch as 
the MRE phantom. Mechanical vibration was applied via a pneu- 
matic system with power levels of 3, 5, and 7 percent to pro- 
duce wave data with varying SNR (Resoundant Inc., Rochester, 
MN). Scanning was performed on a compact 3T system with a 
high performance gradient capable of 80 mT/m amplitude and 
700T/m/s slew rate ( Foo et al., 2018 ) using a modiﬁed GRE pulse 
sequence with the following parameters: 7.2 mT/m motion en- 
coding gradient (MEG) amplitude, mechanical vibration = 60 Hz, 
TE = 20.4 ms, TR = 24.1 ms, one 16.7 ms ﬁrst-moment nulled 
MEG cycle, motion encoding sensitivity (MENC) = 7.1 μm/rad, 
BW = ±25 kHz, FOV = 240 × 240 × 192 mm 3 , acquisition ma- 
trix = 120 × 120 × 96, ﬂip angle = 12 °, 2D GRAPPA accelera- 
tion = 2, 8 channel receiver array (Invivo, Gainesville, FL), scan 
time = 12:25. 
ILI, HLI, and DI were applied to the ﬁrst harmonic of the curl of 
the measured displacement ﬁeld. ILI and HLI results were analyzed 
and displayed without any further ﬁltering or smoothing. DI results 
were median ﬁltered with a 3 × 3 × 3 kernel for display only. 
Contrast to noise ratio (CNR) as deﬁned in ( Doyley et al., 2003 ) 
is reported for all three inversions. Note that for DI, CNR was cal- 
culated using the median values of the inclusion and background 
to minimize potential bias due to outliers. To statistically test for 
differences in CNR, two linear mixed effects models were ﬁt with 
CNR as the response variable. The full model included ﬁxed effects 
of inversion, driver power, inclusion diameter and a constant, with 
random slopes (inversion and inclusion diameter) and intercepts 
for each driver power. The restricted model was identical with the 
exception that the ﬁxed effect of inversion was removed. The like- 
lihood ratio test was then used to test if inclusion of inversion as a 
ﬁxed effect signiﬁcantly improved the prediction of CNR ( p < 0.05 
considered signiﬁcant). 
To evaluate the performance of each inversion at the bound- 
aries of the inclusions, a line proﬁle across the boundary was ﬁt. 
A map of distance (in voxels) from the inclusion boundary was de- 
veloped by repeated dilations (distance from the boundary into the 
background) or erosions (distance from the boundary into the in- 
clusion) of the inclusion masks using a 6-connected jack-shaped 
structural element. For each distance from the boundary, the me- 
dian stiffness as well as the 97.5 and 2.5 percentiles were esti- 
mated by a 10 0 0 sample bootstrap with case resampling (treating 
inclusions as cases). Similar to the CNR test, two linear mixed ef- 
fects models were ﬁt with the error in squared stiffness estimates 
as the response variable. To reduce the number of model param- 
eters, a restricted cubic spline basis was used to represent posi- 
tion with respect to the boundary (3 knots located 3 voxels into 
the background, on the boundary, and 3 voxels into the inclusion). 
The full model included inversion, position, and their interaction 
as ﬁxed effects, with random slopes (inversion, position, and their 
interaction) and intercepts for each inclusion. The restricted model 
was identical with the exception that the ﬁxed effects involving in- 
version were removed. The likelihood ratio test was again used to 
test if inclusion of inversion as a ﬁxed effect signiﬁcantly improved 
the prediction of the squared error in stiffness estimates ( p < 0.05 
considered signiﬁcant). 
2.7. In vivo evaluation 
Human data were obtained with institutional review board ap- 
proval and written informed consent from all patients. Menin- 
giomas offer an opportunity to assess the accuracy of ILI in vivo as 
they are well deﬁned lesions with clear borders and their stiffness 
is known qualitatively from the surgical report at resection. Since 
meningiomas have high variability in stiffness, we consider a sub- 
set of tumors stiffer than normal brain to allow cross-subject anal- 
ysis of the spatial pattern of stiffness changes. Of the 64 menin- 
gioma cases with available surgical reports in our MRE database, 
23 were stiff enough that suction could not be used for removal of 
any part of the tumor (encompassing scales 3, 4, and 5 described 
in ( Hughes et al., 2015 )). Of these 23, one case was excluded be- 
cause of a T1-weighted (T1w) image of insuﬃcient quality to ac- 
curately segment the meningioma and two cases were excluded 
because of extensive tumor growth into the sinuses. After gener- 
ating the stiffness maps but before any further processing, three 
additional cases were excluded because the median tumor stiff- 
ness for DI was softer than normal brain. All three of these cases 
were highly vascular tumors, where the surgical score, which is 
dependent on the surgical instrumentation used to resect the tu- 
mor, is more likely to be discordant with MRE measured stiffness 
( Hughes et al., 2015 ). Seventeen cases were included in the ﬁnal 
analysis. 
MRE data were acquired as described in ( Hughes et al., 2015 ) 
with 3 mm isotropic resolution and 8 phase offsets sampled over 
one period of 60 Hz motion on clinical 3T scanners (GE Medi- 
cal Systems, Milwaukee, WI) or the compact 3T scanner described 
above ( Foo et al., 2018 ). MRE data were resampled to 2 mm 
isotropic resolution prior to computation of the curl and subse- 
quent inversion to allow the use of the same ILI and HLI net- 
works used in Sections 2.4 –2.6 . Tumor segmentation was per- 
formed manually on a T1w image acquired in the same session as 
the MRE scan (acquisition previously described in ( Murphy et al., 
2013b )) using FSLView ( Jenkinson et al., 2012 ). Gray matter, white 
matter, and cerebrospinal ﬂuid probability maps were computed in 
SPM5 ( Ashburner and Friston, 2005 ). Then the T1w image, along 
with the tissue probability maps and tumor mask, were registered 
to the MRE magnitude image, and the T1w image and all derived 
masks were resampled to 2 mm isotropic resolution. ILI, HLI, and 
DI were applied to the ﬁrst harmonic of the curl of the resampled 
MRE displacement images. 
To assess overall spatial agreement between manual tracings 
and a stiffness-based segmentation, stiffness maps for each inver- 
sion in each subject were thresholded at the 95th percentile of the 
normal brain stiffness, and the Dice coeﬃcient was calculated be- 
tween the thresholded stiffness map within the tumor mask and 
the tumor mask itself. To compute the stiffness threshold, the gray 
and white matter probability maps were summed and all voxels 
with a combined probability greater than or equal to 95% that 
were outside the tumor mask were deﬁned as normal brain. To 
reduce bias introduced by edge effects, two erosions using a 6- 
connected jack-shaped structural element were performed on the 
resulting segmentation. The 95 th percentile within this volume was 
then used to threshold the stiffness map. Paired, two-tailed T -tests 
were used to compare Dice coeﬃcients between ILI and DI and ILI 
and HLI ( p < 0.05 considered signiﬁcant). 
To assess inversion performance at the tumor boundaries, sim- 
ilar analysis to that in Section 2.6 was used. A map of distance 
(in voxels) from the tumor boundary was developed by repeated 
dilations (distance from the boundary into the brain) or erosions 
(distance from the boundary into the tumor) of the tumor mask 
using a 6-connected jack-shaped structural element. For each sub- 
ject, the median stiffness at each location for each inversion was 
used to generate a summary line proﬁle across the tumor bound- 
