J.M. Scott, A. Arani and A. Manduca et al. / Medical Image Analysis 63 (2020) 101710 
9 
Fig. 6. ILI provides sharper transitions at inclusion boundaries. Negative values 
on the x -axis represent distance from the boundary into the background while pos- 
itive values show distance into the inclusion. Dashed lines connect median values 
at each position while solid lines show the 2.5 th and 97.5 th percentiles for each in- 
version. 
mor. This threshold effect likely contributes to the relatively low 
Dice coeﬃcients seen with all three inversions, and would have 
the biggest impact on ILI. HLI and DI would be expected to blur 
out regions of heterogeneity within the tumor, while ILI may de- 
tect them. As expected, ILI provided sharper transitions in stiffness 
between the normal brain and tumor than DI and HLI ( Fig. 9 ). 
This study suggests that ILI potentially possesses advantages 
over previously described inversion algorithms. LFE techniques es- 
timate instantaneous spatial frequency by applying a set of ﬁlters 
Fig. 8. Dice coeﬃcient results in 17 meningioma cases. ILI produces a signiﬁcantly 
higher Dice coeﬃcient than DI with 9 × 9 × 9 quartic smoothing. There is no sig- 
niﬁcant difference between HLI and ILI Dice coeﬃcients ( p = 0.15). Dashed lines 
connect the individual cases across the inversions. ∗p < 0.001, ns = nonsigniﬁcant, 
two-tailed paired t -tests. 
to the displacement data and developing an estimate based on the 
energy in each ﬁlter band ( Clayton et al., 2013 ; Knutsson et al., 
1994 ). It also assumes local homogeneity and has limited spatial 
resolution ( Manduca et al., 2001 ). Most DI techniques, which solve 
the equations of motion in a viscoelastic medium ( Oliphant et al., 
20 01 ; Papazoglou et al., 20 08 ; Romano et al., 1998 ), assume ho- 
mogeneity ( Manduca et al., 2001 ). As they rely on second deriva- 
tives, their major drawback is voxel-level numerical instability, es- 
pecially in the presence of noise, which requires additional ﬁlter- 
Fig. 7. T1-weighted image and inversion results in two meningioma cases. For Case 1, the superior tumor was described as stiff throughout and the posterior tumor 
was described as having heterogeneous stiffness on resection (only the superior tumor was included in group analysis). In Case 2, the tumor was described as very stiff
throughout at resection. Regions of interest outline the tumor extent as manually traced on the T1-weighted image. 
