J.M. Scott, A. Arani and A. Manduca et al. / Medical Image Analysis 63 (2020) 101710 
7 
Fig. 3. Summary results from the coupled harmonic oscillators (CHO) experiment. Each plot shows the error in inclusion estimate (estimated stiffness in the inclusion - 
true stiffness in inclusion) vs the inclusion contrast (true inclusion stiffness - true background stiffness) in 10 0 0 CHO simulations. For a perfect inversion all points would 
be along the zero-error line. If an inversion completely fails to detect the inclusion, points will be along the diagonal labeled “No Contrast”. The color of the data points 
corresponds to inclusion size. 
range, where ILI estimates are biased soft in the noisiest examples 
( Fig. 2 ). Both HLI and DI show no clear trend with SNR (right col- 
umn, Fig. 2 ), and produce estimates biased toward the center of 
the training range, suggesting that at the spatial footprints shown 
these methods are more affected by their assumption of material 
homogeneity than SNR. 
Additional, larger-footprint simulation experiments showed that 
the median stiffness of an inclusion estimated by ILI was more ac- 
curate than estimates by DI and HLI at multiple noise levels. The 
perfect performance (to numerical precision) of DI in the homo- 
geneous, noise-free simulation ( Table 2 ) serves as an important 
check that the simulation produces accurate displacement ﬁelds 
that obey the fundamental assumptions of conventional inversion 
algorithms under ideal conditions. In noise-free simulations with 
inclusions, DI accurately estimated the stiffness of large inclusions, 
with errors only in the smaller inclusions ( Fig. 3 ). This is expected, 
as with decreasing inclusion size, the proportion of voxels affected 
by the boundary will increase. Due to the partial volume effect, 
this will result in underestimated stiffness of a stiff inclusion in 
a soft background and overestimated stiffness of a soft inclusion 
in a stiff background. This effect can be seen in both the DI and 
HLI panels of Fig. 3 . These partial volume effects are substantially 
reduced by ILI, though ILI actually appears to overestimate inclu- 
sion contrast in some of the smallest inclusions when SNR is high. 
With the large spatial footprints used in Fig. 3 , all three inversion 
algorithms appear robust to noise, with relatively little change in 
performance as noise is added. However, when using smaller spa- 
tial footprints ( Table 2 ), it is clear that DI is more sensitive to 
noise than the ANN inversions, which is in agreement with pre- 
vious ﬁndings ( Murphy et al., 2018 ). 
Results in the phantom suggest that ILI improves the detectabil- 
ity of focal inclusions, producing higher CNR than DI and HLI in six 
